kubernetes/README.md, before:

# Kubernetes Deployment

Applications deployed using [Argo CD](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
- Standard installation
- Not high availability
	- Start simple

## Directory Structure

```
./
├── bootstrap  <─────────────────┐
│   └── *.yaml                   │
└── apps                         │
    ├── root  <─────────┐        │
    │   ├── root.yaml ──┘        │
    │   ├── argo-cd.yaml ──┐     │
    │   └── <others>.yaml ━┿━━┓  │
    ├── argo-cd  <─────────┘  ┃  │
    │   └── *.yaml ───────────╂──┘
    └── <others>  <━━━━━━━━━━━┛
        └── *.yaml
```

App (`./apps/root/`) of Apps (`./apps/*`) Pattern

- Root app manages every app, including Argo CD and Root app itself
- Argo CD definition is split across `./apps` and `./bootstrap`
	- `./bootstrap` contains the bare minimum to install
	- `./apps/argo-cd` contains additional configs

## Bootstrap

Assumption: A fresh kubernetes cluster provisioned by [OpenTofu IaC](../host_deploy)

0. Obtain cluster kubeconfig via `tofu output -raw kubeconfig`
	> Save to `~/.kube/config`  
	> Or `export KUBECONFIG=<path>`  
	> Or `kubectl --kubeconfig=<path>`
1. Install Argo CD via `kubectl apply --server-side -k ./bootstrap`
	> Failing to add `--server-side` results in an error:  
	> `The CustomResourceDefinition "applicationsets.argoproj.io" is invalid: metadata.annotations: Too long: may not be more than 262144 bytes`  
	> [Known issue](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/latest/operator-manual/upgrading/3.2-3.3/#applicationset-crd-exceeds-the-size-limit-for-client-side-apply)  

	> Acquire initial Argo CD web UI password: `kubectl get secrets -n argocd argocd-initial-admin-secret -o jsonpath='{.data.password}' | base64 -d`  
	> Access Argo CD web UI: `kubectl port-forward svc/argocd-server -n argocd 8080:443`
2. Register Gitlab access token via `./bootstrap/setgitlab.sh '<access token>'`
	> Require `Maintainer` role + `read_api` scope  
	> [Reference](https://docs.gitlab.com/user/permissions/#project-cicd)
3. Instantiate Root app via `kubectl apply -f ./apps/root/root.yaml`
	> Ensure Argo CD credentials are set in Gitlab

## Deploying a new application

- Create a directory under `./apps` with the application name
- Define application under its directory
- Register application under `./apps/root`

## Networking

### Goals

- Every service should be reachable with a constant entry point
	- Either IP / Subdomain + Path
- Each service should be independently configurable
	- Ideally, configuring one service should not require knowledge of how other services are configured
	- Address assignment should be automatic without conflict

### Strategy

- L4 services
	- IP address allocated by load balancer
		- Use [MetalLB](https://metallb.io/)
	- DNS records for services updated to point to its allocated IP address
		- Use [ExternalDNS](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/external-dns/latest/) to issue DNS record updates
		- Deploy a DNS server as a service
			- [Pi-hole](https://pi-hole.net/)
				- Wildcard domains not supported OOTB
			- [Adguard Home](https://adguard.com/en/adguard-home/overview.html)
			- [Technitium](https://technitium.com/)
	- For shared resources
		- eg: Persistence
- L7 services
	- Subdomain / Path based routing
		- [Kubernetes Gateway API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/gateway/)
- Future plans
	- Consider [Cilium](https://cilium.io/)
		- Can handle L4 + L7 load balancing

## Storage & Secrets

Configuring networking to work with domain names require a DNS server with stateful persistent storage.  
Since a service can be deployed to any of the worker nodes, using local storage of each kubernetes node (VM) is not desirable.  
A better solution is to utilize the storage available in the hypervisor host.

### Storage options

- NFS server + [NFS provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/nfs-subdir-external-provisioner)
	- Slow IO
- [Proxmox CSI plugin](https://github.com/sergelogvinov/proxmox-csi-plugin)
	- Require clustering proxmox nodes
	- Require correct labeling of kubernetes
		- Excessive coupling of hypervisor and kubernetes configuration
	- Require VM `SCSI Controller` set to `VirtIO SCSI | VirtIO SCSI Single`
	- Require Proxmox API token
- ZFS + [Democratic CSI](https://github.com/democratic-csi/democratic-csi) using iSCSI
	- Require root SSH connection
		- Can also use user with passwordless sudo for ZFS related commands
- [Ceph](https://ceph.io/en/) / [Longhorn](https://longhorn.io/) / [OpenEBS](https://openebs.io/)
	- Operates on distributed storage arrays with replication
		- Great for resilliency if physically distinct storage
		- IO amplification if virtualized on same physical disk
	- CPU / memory overhead

Democratic CSI was chosen for the following reasons:
- Decouple hypervisor and kubernetes
- Minimal overhead for single disk host

Choosing a storage backend that lives outside kubernetes creates a dependency on managing kubernetes secrets.  
Refer to [../README.md#secrets](../README.md#secrets)

#### Configuring Democratic CSI

Democratic CSI only provides a helm chart.
- Receives connection credentials as input
- Helm cannot inject references to kubernetes secret
	- Requires the application chart to cooperate
	- Argo CD refuses to support injecting secrets into helm charts
		- https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/1786
		- https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/4041
		- https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/5202
		- https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/12060
- Democratic CSI documentation does not state whether it supports referencing kubernetes secrets
	- Eventually found the [official chart repo's example](https://github.com/democratic-csi/charts/blob/master/stable/democratic-csi/values.yaml) which shows it can reference existing kubernetes config

Democratic CSI shows the following [special configuration required for Talos nodes](https://github.com/democratic-csi/democratic-csi?tab=readme-ov-file#talos) (at the time of writing)
```yaml
node:
  hostPID: true
  driver:
    extraEnv:
      - name: ISCSIADM_HOST_STRATEGY
        value: nsenter
      - name: ISCSIADM_HOST_PATH
        value: /usr/local/sbin/iscsiadm
    iscsiDirHostPath: /usr/local/etc/iscsi  # <--- This is outdated and must be set to `/var/iscsi`
    iscsiDirHostPathType: ""
```

`node.driver.iscsiDirHostPath` must be updated to match [changes in Talos](https://github.com/siderolabs/extensions/issues/688) but the instructions have not been updated for more than 2 months despite the [relevant issue](https://github.com/democratic-csi/democratic-csi/issues/461) being closed

`csiDriver.name` must also be a valid lowercase RFC 1123 subdomain, which neither the comments in the example config nor the linked references mention.
- After deploying, Argo CD shows the reason in its error log

Although some reference links for configuring ZFS iSCSI on linux has been provided, it would have been nice if the minimum requirements were written explicitly.
```bash
# Name should be 17 chars or less
zfs create "$ZPOOL/$DATASET"
apt install -y targetcli-fb
targetcli <<EOF
cd /iscsi
create $IQN_BASENAME
exit
EOF
```

Commit message:

fix: Update iSCSI server configuration to synchronize tpg attributes

kubernetes/README.md, after:

# Kubernetes Deployment

Applications deployed using [Argo CD](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
- Standard installation
- Not high availability
	- Start simple

## Directory Structure

```
./
├── bootstrap  <─────────────────┐
│   └── *.yaml                   │
└── apps                         │
    ├── root  <─────────┐        │
    │   ├── root.yaml ──┘        │
    │   ├── argo-cd.yaml ──┐     │
    │   └── <others>.yaml ━┿━━┓  │
    ├── argo-cd  <─────────┘  ┃  │
    │   └── *.yaml ───────────╂──┘
    └── <others>  <━━━━━━━━━━━┛
        └── *.yaml
```

App (`./apps/root/`) of Apps (`./apps/*`) Pattern

- Root app manages every app, including Argo CD and Root app itself
- Argo CD definition is split across `./apps` and `./bootstrap`
	- `./bootstrap` contains the bare minimum to install
	- `./apps/argo-cd` contains additional configs

## Bootstrap

Assumption: A fresh kubernetes cluster provisioned by [OpenTofu IaC](../host_deploy)

0. Obtain cluster kubeconfig via `tofu output -raw kubeconfig`
	> Save to `~/.kube/config`  
	> Or `export KUBECONFIG=<path>`  
	> Or `kubectl --kubeconfig=<path>`
1. Install Argo CD via `kubectl apply --server-side -k ./bootstrap`
	> Failing to add `--server-side` results in an error:  
	> `The CustomResourceDefinition "applicationsets.argoproj.io" is invalid: metadata.annotations: Too long: may not be more than 262144 bytes`  
	> [Known issue](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/latest/operator-manual/upgrading/3.2-3.3/#applicationset-crd-exceeds-the-size-limit-for-client-side-apply)  

	> Acquire initial Argo CD web UI password: `kubectl get secrets -n argocd argocd-initial-admin-secret -o jsonpath='{.data.password}' | base64 -d`  
	> Access Argo CD web UI: `kubectl port-forward svc/argocd-server -n argocd 8080:443`
2. Register Gitlab access token via `./bootstrap/setgitlab.sh '<access token>'`
	> Require `Maintainer` role + `read_api` scope  
	> [Reference](https://docs.gitlab.com/user/permissions/#project-cicd)
3. Instantiate Root app via `kubectl apply -f ./apps/root/root.yaml`
	> Ensure Argo CD credentials are set in Gitlab

## Deploying a new application

- Create a directory under `./apps` with the application name
- Define application under its directory
- Register application under `./apps/root`

## Networking

### Goals

- Every service should be reachable with a constant entry point
	- Either IP / Subdomain + Path
- Each service should be independently configurable
	- Ideally, configuring one service should not require knowledge of how other services are configured
	- Address assignment should be automatic without conflict

### Strategy

- L4 services
	- IP address allocated by load balancer
		- Use [MetalLB](https://metallb.io/)
	- DNS records for services updated to point to its allocated IP address
		- Use [ExternalDNS](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/external-dns/latest/) to issue DNS record updates
		- Deploy a DNS server as a service
			- [Pi-hole](https://pi-hole.net/)
				- Wildcard domains not supported OOTB
			- [Adguard Home](https://adguard.com/en/adguard-home/overview.html)
			- [Technitium](https://technitium.com/)
	- For shared resources
		- eg: Persistence
- L7 services
	- Subdomain / Path based routing
		- [Kubernetes Gateway API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/gateway/)
- Future plans
	- Consider [Cilium](https://cilium.io/)
		- Can handle L4 + L7 load balancing

## Storage & Secrets

Configuring networking to work with domain names require a DNS server with stateful persistent storage.  
Since a service can be deployed to any of the worker nodes, using local storage of each kubernetes node (VM) is not desirable.  
A better solution is to utilize the storage available in the hypervisor host.

### Storage options

- NFS server + [NFS provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/nfs-subdir-external-provisioner)
	- Slow IO
- [Proxmox CSI plugin](https://github.com/sergelogvinov/proxmox-csi-plugin)
	- Require clustering proxmox nodes
	- Require correct labeling of kubernetes
		- Excessive coupling of hypervisor and kubernetes configuration
	- Require VM `SCSI Controller` set to `VirtIO SCSI | VirtIO SCSI Single`
	- Require Proxmox API token
- ZFS + [Democratic CSI](https://github.com/democratic-csi/democratic-csi) using iSCSI
	- Require root SSH connection
		- Can also use user with passwordless sudo for ZFS related commands
- [Ceph](https://ceph.io/en/) / [Longhorn](https://longhorn.io/) / [OpenEBS](https://openebs.io/)
	- Operates on distributed storage arrays with replication
		- Great for resilliency if physically distinct storage
		- IO amplification if virtualized on same physical disk
	- CPU / memory overhead

Democratic CSI was chosen for the following reasons:
- Decouple hypervisor and kubernetes
- Minimal overhead for single disk host

Choosing a storage backend that lives outside kubernetes creates a dependency on managing kubernetes secrets.  
Refer to [../README.md#secrets](../README.md#secrets)

#### Configuring Democratic CSI

Democratic CSI only provides a helm chart.
- Receives connection credentials as input
- Helm cannot inject references to kubernetes secret
	- Requires the application chart to cooperate
	- Argo CD refuses to support injecting secrets into helm charts
		- https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/1786
		- https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/4041
		- https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/5202
		- https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/12060
- Democratic CSI documentation does not state whether it supports referencing kubernetes secrets
	- Eventually found the [official chart repo's example](https://github.com/democratic-csi/charts/blob/master/stable/democratic-csi/values.yaml) which shows it can reference existing kubernetes config

Democratic CSI shows the following [special configuration required for Talos nodes](https://github.com/democratic-csi/democratic-csi?tab=readme-ov-file#talos) (at the time of writing)
```yaml
node:
  hostPID: true
  driver:
    extraEnv:
      - name: ISCSIADM_HOST_STRATEGY
        value: nsenter
      - name: ISCSIADM_HOST_PATH
        value: /usr/local/sbin/iscsiadm
    iscsiDirHostPath: /usr/local/etc/iscsi  # <--- This is outdated and must be set to `/var/iscsi`
    iscsiDirHostPathType: ""
```

`node.driver.iscsiDirHostPath` must be updated to match [changes in Talos](https://github.com/siderolabs/extensions/issues/688) but the instructions have not been updated for more than 2 months despite the [relevant issue](https://github.com/democratic-csi/democratic-csi/issues/461) being closed

`csiDriver.name` must also be a valid lowercase RFC 1123 subdomain, which neither the comments in the example config nor the linked references mention.
- After deploying, Argo CD shows the reason in its error log

Although some reference links for configuring ZFS iSCSI on linux has been provided, it would have been nice if the minimum requirements were written explicitly.  
In addition, iSCSI tpg attributes must be set manually since configuration defined in kubernetes do not apply retroactively to existing resources.
```bash
# Name should be 17 chars or less
zfs create "$ZPOOL/$DATASET"
apt install -y targetcli-fb
targetcli <<EOF
cd /iscsi
create $IQN_BASENAME
exit
EOF
```
